music
Hello, and welcome to Veterans of the Valley!
I'm Tom Terbivill.
You won't find a Prouder, Aggie, and Joe Brewster.
Being an Aggie is in his blood.
His father, his grandfather, his great uncle, his uncle, his sons, all fellow Aggies.
And like his father, Colonel Olin Finley Brewster, Joe Brewster served his country in combat.
Olin Brewster, a decorated soldier of the Battle of the Volts in World War II.
Joe Brewster, a ground infantry fighter in the jungles of Vietnam and Cambodia.
It's our pleasure to have Lieutenant Joe Brewster as our guest on Veterans of the Valley.
Joe, it's great to have you here.
First, I want you to talk about Olin Finley Brewster, your dad.
I know you told me one time that there were probably not many officers that were more
written about in World War II than Olin Brewster.
Talk about your dad and what he did.
Well, my dad was a major.
His promise came about in the Battle of the Volts.
Very much to Germany's Triter Counter Fenceype in December of 1944.
Trying to split the American Allied Forces, get the Antwerp.
And for this assessed, they had to go through several major road intersections.
And my dad was responsible for an area south of Antwerp, area called Parker's Crossroads.
And they held this intersection for two or three days, keeping the German divisions
back.
But being right in the middle of a core boundary, one core unit pulled back to reset their lines.
The other core unit did not, which my dad was still left forward.
And the only reason he had to pull that was the Germans got in and around behind him.
So he was given the orders to pull back the best way he could.
Pulling forward, he lost several tanks.
Pulling backwards, he lost several tanks.
And he realized that point in time that he wouldn't be able to give men out successfully
unless they wanted to destroy the rest of their vehicles.
He was able to march all his men out on Christmas Eve there in December 1944.
And it was a story that you're very proud of and you're very proud of him.
And how you lost him not too many years ago.
But he was a person who you were very interested in his service and he and yours.
Well, he brought us kids up, understanding two things.
And number one, we're going to be Aggies.
Right.
We end up, my brother and I end up being third generation Aggies, come through in him.
And he also told us that we had an obligation to our country.
And we would be soldiers.
And my brother just retired, full kernel, stationed down at Fort Sam down in San
Town.
My military career didn't last as long as my dad's and my brothers after spending a couple
years in an active army and then a couple years, two or three years in inactive reserves.
My service came to an end.
Not a day goes by that I don't think about it.
But my dad pretty much set the pattern which us boys had to follow.
Let's talk about the path that brought you not only to ANM but then into the service.
It was a little bit unusual back in the mid 60s when you came to ANM.
There was a brand new program then that still exists today.
Talk about sort of the program that sent you through and to the military at ANM.
Well, my brother was already here at ANM being class of 66.
And it was my turn to come to ANM, but my freshman year I didn't quite have the monies
to come to the fine university here on the brothers.
So I ended up spending a couple years at Temple Junior College over in Temple.
At that time I thought my dream of getting into core here at ANM had come to an end, but
ANM started this new program called Two Year Program where you could go to a summer
camp between your sophomore and junior year in college.
And then you come as a junior in the core, but naturally with freshman privileges.
And then you go to a second summer camp between your junior and senior year.
And so because of this it enabled me to go ahead and get my commission at Texas Indian
University in a two year timeframe, still the four year timeframe.
And you were a distinguished military student here at Texas A&M, is that right?
Yes, sir, that's correct.
And I believe what system in that is, like I say, being a third generation Aggie, I knew
a lot about NM, I knew a lot about the core, I knew what was expected of me.
Also, my dad being the military, I had gone out to Fort Hood with him on numerous occasions
as a kid, so understood the military ways.
The first camp I went to between my sophomore and junior year taught me basic military,
not only to be able to march, to be able to fire a weapon.
I did things prior to coming in my junior year that a lot of juniors in the core had not
got to do yet.
So when it came time to teach in dismounted drill and doing things with weapons, I was often
used as an instructor.
Then between my junior and senior year, I excelled at Fort Silocahoma.
And so that gave me an opportunity to be nominated for and receive this DMS and later DMG.
It also gave you the opportunity to choose your specialty in the Army, or at least narrow
it down.
And I know you said you put down infantry armoured in artillery and you got infantry,
is that right?
Well, back then you were required to put one combat branch, which would have been
armored or infantry artillery.
Then you put down two service branches, a quarter master of transportation.
I was a little gung-hole side back then, so I wanted to go combat, so I put them down
infantry armoured in artillery.
I broke my dad's heart because he was armoured.
But I knew that I wanted to go infantry because Vietnam was going at the time.
And I couldn't see fighting in the jungles of Vietnam sitting in a half track or a tank.
I thought my chances were a lot better than infantrymen.
And so that's the way I selected an army based on a great wisdom gave it to me.
When did you range your school?
I'll talk about that.
Oh, love range of school.
I knew that when I came through, I was basically at Fort Benning.
But again, my path was towards Vietnam.
And I felt like the best insurers policy to have at time is to take some of the better
schools that the army was offering.
I did the airborne jump school.
It was great for just getting out and running every morning and jumping out of an airplane,
but I couldn't see its full usefulness in Vietnam.
But the range of school taught small unit tactics.
And it taught you what was like to fight in jungle where you were spent two weeks in
the Atlantic of Georgia doing mountain warfare.
And then they took us down to Algonair Force Base to jungles down in Florida.
And we spent two and a half weeks of maneuvering down there.
And that gave me a really good experience of what I could expect when I got to Vietnam.
You went to Fort Riley, Kansas for three months.
I guess for your final training before you went in country.
1970, I guess this was toward the latter years actually of the war.
1970, our first or second week of January, you were in country and you served for 11 months.
I was going to talk about when you first went there.
I'm going to let you just sort of go ahead and sort of talk about your 11 months in service
in Vietnam.
I know you talk about that you had a guardian angel on you many times.
So just go with it and talk about your service in Vietnam.
Well, one thing that I found out real quickly in Vietnam is it doesn't matter how good you
are.
A lot of it to turn on the zone, how lucky you can also be.
And I often refer to it as being the guardian angel.
My first day out in the field, I was flown out with another lieutenant who was also being
assigned to the same battalion I was being assigned to.
And also in helicopter was a full colonel who happened to also be a press routine minister.
So I felt like if you had to go into combat, that was probably the best person to go in
with.
As I exited the helicopter at my first forward base, there was an officer waiting for me
out on the pad.
And I thought that was my welcome committee.
Well, I found out that was the lieutenant who's place I was taking.
I thought and was an understanding that I would work with him up to a week to get a better
grasp of what to expect of my troops in my platoon as well as the area of operation we'd
be working in.
Well, he let me know immediately as he was boarding the helicopter that he thought his luck
had run out and he was going back to the rear base and I was on my own.
My dad had always told me that look to your in-seos.
They are the backbone of the army and thank goodness my platoon had a crusty O in-seo.
He said, and he took me under his wing and he said, lieutenant, if you listen to me,
I can get you through this.
And so for the first two or three weeks, I pretty much listened to him and I felt like
that a lot of my success came from him.
But I was thrown into it almost immediately after meeting my company commander and was
introduced to my platoon and met a lot of the platoon members.
We were out the second night I was in country and we had river boats that the Navy provided
us to take us up.
We were forming an umbrella protection for Saigon.
We were trying to interdict both forces as well as supplies coming in from Cambodia by
either water routes or trail jungle trails.
And so we were supposed to interdict them by setting up ambushes at night and preventing
them from moving through the area freely.
My first night we were set up and normally you set up either a linear ambush with rear
security or an L-shaped ambush with rear security, pinned on the train and what you're
trying to ambush a trail or water wipe.
As we got in late though, we did not have an opportunity to check out the trains.
We just formed a wagon wheel type of ambush, figured it would be in direction 360, we'd
be ready for it.
After about an hour on the ground, I didn't have an hour on the ground.
I was tapped by one of the members of my units saying they're out there and I said who's
out there?
He informed me that it sounded like VCU and VIA had found our position and he suggested
we go full alert.
And by that time our RTO also punched me and said lieutenant, the train sergeant on the
side of the ambush says that he has movement out in front of him.
So I called my, and Cion said, hey, this is my first night out here, what do you recommend?
He said well, go to a full, a mad minute.
Which meant that everybody in our ambush would fire immediately at the same time for one
full minute.
Which we did.
And sure enough, the NVAVC, we're out in front of us.
We received return fire.
We suffered four or five casualties at that time.
We ourselves only found a few blood trails of the, of the NVAVC had no KIA that we could
count for.
Since it was so late at night, since we could not move to another position successfully
and safely, we were extracted that night and then we continued to do the same routine over
the next couple of weeks.
The mad minutes.
This is your first really full night in command of the platoon.
And how did you feel?
I mean, it must have been rather mind boggling for you to realize where you were and that
this was the real thing.
It's amazing how with all the training that I had done both through, actually all for
basic, Ranger and Airborne, that immediately when the first rounds were fired, that I was
even aware of what I was doing.
There was a mechanism kicked in.
My infantry platoon leader just said, quote, this is how it's done.
You have studied it over and over again, follow your intuition.
Your training will not take you the wrong direction.
And I noticed that throughout my nine or ten months out of the field that every time a
situation occurred, I'd fall back on that training and a training was always successful.
It worked.
You talked to me earlier about that these troops in Vietnam, sometimes that they had to endure
for lack of a better word, several different leaders during a year because the officers
were moved in and moved out of Vietnam, they might get three or four.
So you were placed in that situation to where you were a brand new leader for troops that
had been there, maybe a couple of tours.
So I heard it talk about that and what that was like in the help that you got sort of being
placed in that situation.
Well, it seemed that part of being in Vietnam was to stop communism, but it was also a training
base for our young soldiers.
The two leaders, the first and second lieutenant's as well as the captains, was in a testing area.
They all, our majority of them were planning on making the Army, regular Army.
And they were all preparing for that big war that at some time in the future we thought
we might have with either China or Russia.
So they were trying to give as many young officers a chance to be in command.
So when I got in country, most of the officers were being rotated out in three or four months.
But Nixon in 1970 said, hey, we're going to start with drawn troops.
So a few and a few of the troops were going.
So instead of me spending the normal three or four months online, I ended up spending
nine.
Problem with this rotation, everything is that you have an entry between a 40 or 45 men.
You have an officer who comes in there and only spends three months.
And he may be a West Point graduate.
And that particular officer has his own way of doing things.
After three months, he would be moved to the rear or to another position.
And you might get an officer coming in for who graduated from Arkansas ROTC, our Texas
Indian University.
Each one wanted to do it their way.
And each time the Bertune had to suffer through this gradual learning again.
Well, the only common base we had was the NCOs.
And that if they had been in military long enough, and if you normally had an EF67, they'd
been in military probably five to ten years.
So they were the constant that went with each Bertune.
They would take the lieutenant in the side and said, that will work if your back-state
side is not going to work here lieutenant.
And if you had a good lieutenant, he would listen to him.
And pretty much that's how we handled our situation for the first two months, one month, until
I got my feet on the ground.
And after that, the constant was made.
And being allowed to stay with my unit for up to eight or nine months, it benefited our
unit.
We were more cohesive during the nine or ten months.
I was in the field.
A lot of the casualties that occurred in Vietnam occurred from baby traps.
We got out in the field and we moved through jungles.
We moved through water areas.
We moved through Michelin River Plantation.
One thing we did, we moved with stealth.
We moved, we didn't go anywhere unless we took our time.
We paid attention to the environment around us.
We would move, we would stop, we would listen, we would smell.
They would move and do the same thing over and over again every fifteen minutes.
And if you let your troops know what you're going to do that day, a lot of the units failed
to tell the private or the point man, hey, this is our objective for the day.
We just said go in that direction for about two thousand to three thousand meters and then
we're going to ambush tonight.
I would try to make sure that down to my lowest man.
They knew what we're going to do that day.
They felt like we were part of the decision making.
And so that if in fact we hit anything along our way from point A to point B, they would
say it was expected.
I was told by the lieutenant that this is what to expect.
And they were more educated when it came to grasping the situation.
Lieutenant Bruce, you brought some pictures.
You have a lot of photographs from your time in Vietnam.
We're going to show some of them here as a matter of fact that Lieutenant Bruce, your
has.
Go ahead and talk about the picture.
What are we looking at there?
Well, this is a road from Contain.
That's you on the right.
That is me on the far right.
And we are pulling a road security for trucks coming from Contain over to the Cambodian
border.
So our job was to parallel this road and make sure the NVC or the NVA and the VECOM were
not sent up ambushes or put mines out in the road.
So this is sort of a rest break.
We had probably been moving since five in the morning.
We stopped probably getting ready to take a lunch break and then move on down the road.
There'd probably be another unit probably a half mile behind us doing the same thing to
keep the NVVC from coming in behind my unit and plant mines before the truck start bringing
in their supplies to the fire support base.
Let's move on to the next one.
Show a little muscle there.
There's a little muscle here but we're having an officers meeting here.
We're getting ready to head out on the choppers out into the jungle and those are the lieutenants
and our company commander had just given us our operation orders.
And typically us officers would, after the company commander left, us lieutenants would
sort of put our heads together and we'd discuss the operation and if anybody had any great
ideas or expectations of what we should know, the most experienced officer would say,
look, we've been in this area before.
We're going back to it again and this is what you need to know about it.
And so we're just discussing what we're getting ready to do for the next two or three days.
Lieutenant Brewster there in the middle.
Let's move on to the next photograph.
Now you're having some fun with some of the kids there and being not.
You know, there was a, we were pretty much day in day out in the jungles working ambushes
but every once in a while we had the enjoyment of getting to pull protection for a village.
And we enjoyed working with the village people and they enjoyed us.
Typically we would have, in our company of three buttoons, we'd have two buttoons full
in umbrella security on the outside of the village and one of the buttoons would stay inside
the village and help maybe build buildings, build desks for the small kids.
We provided entertainment for them and here we're just taking the opportunity to let the
kids know that we were friendly.
We were easy going.
We were not big giants who were going to hurt them.
And so we're doing a game of splits here and the kids found it very entertaining.
That's you in the back there doing the major splits there.
Yeah.
Here's a couple of other lieutenants.
I was a third-patoon leader.
The gentleman in the middle was second-patoon and the gentleman on the far left was first-patoon.
In Cambodia both of them got shot.
Both survived.
The one in the middle came back for a second time.
His injuries weren't so bad but then about a month or a half later, two months later
he also got here the second time.
I was the fortunate one who managed to always stay out of harm's way.
And that's that Gorni Angel I said it was on my shoulder.
I was in the same mix as they were.
We went into Cambodia.
There was three line buttoons officers.
We had a forward observer and a commander and of those officers I was the only one who came
back on skate.
Okay.
Let's move on to the next photograph.
Another photograph of you.
That is a rice paddy during the summertime.
It's dried up so they don't have rice in there right now growing during the wet seasons
months since.
That would be filled with water probably up to your ankle.
And typically even during wetter, dry time of season you never walk on the berms or the
high ground you see in the background.
That's where the NVA or VC would set their baby traps.
We would walk through the water or through the flat part there.
Now what we're doing here is that we're probably getting ready to go in after spending a week
or two out, pulling ambushes.
And we always like to make sure that we shoot through our old shells, our old weaponry,
getting it clear, clean after weapons.
You don't want to take back bullets that maybe got rusted or maybe got jammed or hit around
while you're going through the jungle getting off helicopters.
So we pretty much clean our weapons and then re-supply ourselves when we got back to the
base camp.
Now naturally we would use all our ammunition at this point because you never know when
you're way back to your base camp you might get shot down.
Before we would shoot maybe half our load here to clear our weapon.
Plus we'd cross-train.
I would be shooting the M79 and getting used to it.
Nothing I would be moving from his rifle over to the machine gun.
So we cross-train so that if one person went down somebody else could also use that weapon.
Okay, let's move on to the next one.
Now this was actually back in the States during training in Colorado, right?
I just thought it was a great picture.
Well it is and you can tell that was not Vietnam because look at the starts uniform.
You would not be wearing that over in the jungles of Vietnam.
When I came out after two years of the Army I went into the reserves and I didn't have
to go active reserve because I had spent time Vietnam so I was under the title of inactive
reserves.
Which meant that if I was needed at some summer camp for two weeks I could be called up.
Well this was a mech unit that came in out of Nebraska who did their train over Fort
Carson in Colorado.
So they called me up to come in.
They were short a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a,
me go up there and spend two weeks.
And so I was working with mech unit.
That's an honor personal carrier.
Right.
And what you do, it's a little bit different than doing infantry.
In infantry you're going to be very close together when you're moving through jungles.
You space a little bit more when you open area.
When you're working with mech and eyes units you're looking more to conventional warfare.
Right.
Something you expect to do if you were Germany fighting in that train at the post of Vietnam.
Okay.
Let's move on to the next one.
The next one was actually taken from a book that you supplied the picture.
I'm going to let you talk about the book real quick because we're running short on time.
But this is a book written by a current professor at Blaine College about Cambodia.
Talk, and that is you on the right.
Talk about that.
That's correct.
About five, six, seven years ago I was reading one of the, the, the local paper here and
there was someone inquiring if you were an officer or an enlisted man that had fallen
Cambodia to 1970.
Please get in touch with this person.
So I thought about it for a couple of days and gave him a call.
And as a lady who actually grew up in Cambodia, her dad had been secretary of their state or
secretary of defense.
And she grew up in time frame of the Kilmer Rouge who took over Cambodia in the 1970s to
1975, the Killing Fields time.
And she wanted to find out some information about the military, American military activities
in Cambodia.
And I was able to provide her some information of which when the book was written she did
mention my name once or twice which I felt very gratified for.
But she was a great lady.
She spent five, six years writing this book.
It's now published.
They can be booked up and picked up in a lot of the local bookstore.
This is where we're coming down from.
Contain head down towards the Cambodian border.
We spent one or two days pulling security for transportation trucks along this route.
And then we went into Cambodia itself to fight.
Okay.
Let's move on to, I believe our last picture.
And there's your dad and there you are sitting next to him.
And this was a time that he was honored in Louisiana, right?
Talk about this.
Well, back in the 1960s during the Cuban crisis my dad, the 49th armory was called up.
Headquartered out of temple, he was a battalion commander.
And they were sent down to Fort Poc, Louisiana.
And all the armory units of the 49th were called down there.
He spent a full year down there.
And so this was probably about six, seven, eight years ago.
They were going on our plaque to the 49th.
And he was requested to come down there.
And he was, so the honoree.
And it gave me an opportunity to spend time with my dad here, more of the war stories that
I heard as a kid.
And as you get older and you've experienced that war situation, you've been there, you
can ask questions a little bit differently than if you've never seen combat.
So I was able now to go in there and find out specifically what did it feel like?
You know, a lot of generic terms you ask, you know, what was it like in a war?
And a person will give you a generic answer.
But if you ask a specific question, like when that's shrapnel buzzes by your head,
or you take casualty in your hand, it's holding down a wound until the men
get there, what went through your head?
I was now able to discuss that with him in a sort of a soldier to soldier way.
Joe, you were awarded the bronze star medal on two occasions for your action on two consecutive days.
May 8th and 9th, 1970.
Talking about what happened those two days.
We went into Cambodia and up until then, most of our combat was small unit back in Vietnam.
The kind of Cambodia was a larger unit's fight in each other.
And we had landed our helicopters.
I was in my opportunity with the first two to go in.
And as soon as we hit the ground helicopters left, we were hit from the woodline by the NBA.
They were detection of cash that was very important to them.
We had to fight our way into the jungles for next two or three days.
We unsuccessfully kept trying to take that cash and that particular bunker complex, which
we finally did take.
During that time frame, I spent a lot of time in the front giving directions, pulling
wounded men back, and the Army thought that maybe I deserved a bronze star for that.
I'm sure there was a lot of soldiers that did a lot more than I did that deserved a bronze
star didn't get it, but somehow I got nominated for it.
On the next day or two later, we were bibwacked along one of the rivers there in Cambodia,
and we were hit, ready to do another mission.
And the Navy came down one of the rivers there, spotted us.
And they had been in the ambush several times the previous day, and they were a little bit
on the touchy side.
And apparently our hire command did not warn them that we were there.
So they immediately opened fire with us with quad 50s, and they had an automatic 79 grenade
launcher, and we started taking severe casualties.
And someone had to get communication with them.
We did not have their radio frequency.
So someone had to get up and actually motioned them.
We were Americans.
And I guess I drew the black vein because I ended up being the one that did it.
And apparently again, somebody thought I deserved something for that.
Again, medals should have been more just than deserved elsewhere, I'm sure.
We need to move along, but with about a month left in your service, you were sent to the
first cavalry, but then eventually sent back to the 25th.
And talk about the message that you got that the chief of staff wanted to see you and
what he had to say to you.
So the 25th empty vision received orders.
They were going to return home.
And Bobby, October, November of 1970.
Because I still had a little over a month left in country.
I was not able to ship home with a lot of the troops.
I was sent to the first cab, figuring I still had a month and a half left, and I could
be of service to them.
Went to their one week school, and they realized, hey, you're a little still too sharp.
You won't benefit us.
And by that time I got orders to return back to the 25th infantry.
Well, as soon as I hit the ground, there was a gentleman standing there, a lieutenant
said that the chief of staff, full colonel, wanted to visit with me.
So I entered his office, and normally a lieutenant does not want to face the chief of staff.
There's something very, very wrong.
This case he had my file in front of him.
He indicated, well, you went to Ranger School, you went to Airborne, received a few
metal.
He said, you're exactly the person I'm looking for.
I said, oh no, not one of these deep, short, black missions are going to send me on.
And it ended up being that he needed someone to take that at the infancy, the vision colors
of the 25th infantry back to Scofield Barracks in Hawaii.
And they felt like that I was the white person to do that.
And it was quite an honor for me to receive the orders to do this.
I trained with about 30 other gentlemen.
We brought all the regimental colors in.
Several of these troops had been middle-owner winners.
So I've got to hear their stories.
They were quite the heroes.
And then in the middle of December we flew into Scofield Barracks in Hawaii, met by a
man.
Then next couple days the colors were transferred back to the 25th there in a way.
I know that was quite an honor for you.
And it's something that probably, of all your memories of your Vietnam experience, it
was that at the end bringing back the colors that is maybe the most meaningful to you.
It is one that I'll always remember.
And I just, that a lot of the soldiers that went to Vietnam did not have the great fortune
I had of returning back to the United States.
Most of the soldiers came back home and most of them were not met at the airports.
There were no bands or anybody who would congratulate them.
And yet here I was coming back with a band waiting for me.
Congratulations.
And so that maybe feels extremely well thought of like I, you know, my time and service
was appreciated.
Joe Brewster, thank you very much for your service.
Thank you for being here.
I appreciate it.
Growing up in Temple Joe Brewster was sure of two things.
He would be an A&M cadet and he would be a soldier.
He served both roles with distinction.
And that's definitely a family trait.
We thank Joe Brewster and all veterans for their service and we thank our underwriter
First National Bank.
For more stories of veterans, be sure to read Brass' Valley Heroes every Sunday in the
Eagle.
For Lieutenant Joe Brewster, I'm Tom Turboville.
We'll see you next time on Veterans of the Valley.